Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules


2
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Contents
Appendix 9: Pokémon V .............................................27
Appendix 10: Pokémon VMAX ..................................27
Appendix 11: Regional Variants ................................28
Appendix 12: TAG TEAM Supporter Cards ...............29
Appendix 13: TAG TEAM .............................................29
Appendix 14: Prism Star Cards ................................. 30
Appendix 15: Rare Fossil and Unidentified Fossil .. 30
Appendix 16: Pokémon-GX .......................................31
Special rules for Pokémon-GX .............................................. 31
Appendix 17: Ultra Beasts ...........................................32
Appendix 18: Dual-Type Pokémon ...........................32
Appendix 19: BREAK Evolution .................................33
Special rules for Pokémon BREAK  .........................................33
Appendix 20: Ancient Traits ......................................34
Appendix 21: Team Flare Hyper Gear ........................34
Appendix 22: Pokémon-EX ........................................35
Special rules for Pokémon-EX ...............................................35
Appendix 23: Mega Evolution Pokémon ................. 36
Special rules for Mega Evolution Pokémon  ..............................36
Appendix 24: Team Plasma Cards .............................37
Appendix 25: ACE SPEC Trainer Cards .......................37
Appendix 26: Restored Pokémon .............................38
Key Restored Pokémon Notes ...............................................38
Glossary ........................................................................39
Credits ...........................................................................41
Become a Pokémon Master! ........................................3
Pokémon TCG Basic Concepts .....................................3
How to Win ........................................................................ 3
Energy Types ..................................................................... 4
Parts of a Pokémon Card ..............................................5
3 Card Types ...................................................................... 6
Zones of the Pokémon TCG ..........................................7
Playing the Game ...........................................................8
How to Win the Game  ......................................................... 8
Setting Up to Play  ............................................................... 8
Parts of a Turn  ................................................................... 9
Turn Actions  .................................................................... 10
Special Conditions  ............................................................15
Pokémon Leagues and ex Battle Decks ................... 17
Advanced Rules ...........................................................18
Full details of taking a mulligan .............................................. 18
What counts as an attack? ...................................................19
Full details of attacking .......................................................20
What’s the difference between “up to” and “any amount”?......... 21
What if you should draw more cards than you have? ................... 21
What if both players win at the same time? .............................. 21
What’s Sudden Death? ........................................................ 21
What does and doesn’t count for a Pokémon’s name? ................ 21
Deck Building ...............................................................22
Appendix 1: Ancient and Future................................23
Appendix 2: Pokémon ex............................................23
Appendix 3: Tera Pokémon ex....................................24
Appendix 4: Lost Zone.................................................24
Appendix 5: Radiant Pokémon..................................25
Appendix 6: Pokémon VSTAR....................................25
Appendix 7: Pokémon V-UNION ...............................26
Appendix 8: Battle Styles ...........................................27


3
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Become a Pokémon Master!
These rules will tell you everything you need to play the Pokémon Trading Card Game.
Your deck of cards represents your Pokémon as well as items and allies that help you
on your adventures.
Trading card games are strategy based and use collectible cards to let each player
customize their game. The best way to learn to play the Pokémon TCG is with an ex Battle
Deck, a ready-to-play 60-card deck that comes packaged with a quick-start rules guide
and everything you need to play!
Once you’re ready, you can start building your collection of cards with Pokémon TCG
booster packs. Trade with your friends for the strongest Pokémon, or collect all your
favorites! Then, build your own 60-card deck, play with your friends, and show off your
own personal Pokémon team!
Pokémon TCG Basic Concepts
How to Win
In the Pokémon TCG, your Pokémon battle your opponent’s Pokémon. The first player to
take all of their Prize cards wins! Also, if your opponent has no Pokémon left in play, or no
cards left to draw at the beginning of their turn, you win the game!
You are a Pokémon Trainer!
You travel across the land, battling other Trainers with your Pokémon,
creatures that love to battle and that have amazing powers!


4
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Energy Types
Pokémon Knock Out opposing Pokémon by using attacks or Abilities. To power their attacks, Pokémon need Energy cards. The Pokémon TCG
has 11 Energy types, and you will find Pokémon matching all 11 types in the game. (Note that there are no Fairy-type Pokémon cards in the
Scarlet & Violet Series, but they do exist in older expansions.).
Each Energy type powers different attacks. Find the ones that match your personality! The Energy types are:
Grass
Grass-type Pokémon often
have attacks that heal
themselves or make their
opponents Poisoned.
Fire
Fire-type Pokémon have big
attacks! They can make their
opponents Burned, but their
attacks need time to build
up again.
Water
Water-type Pokémon can
manipulate Energy and move
Pokémon around on the
other team.
Fighting
Fighting-type Pokémon can
take bigger risks to do extra
damage, and some can flip
coins for combination hits.
Darkness
Darkness-type Pokémon
feature sneaky attacks that
often make opponents discard
cards! They can also make
your opponent’s Pokémon
Poisoned!
Metal
Metal-type Pokémon can
resist attacks for longer than
most other Pokémon.
Lightning
Lightning-type Pokémon can
bring back used Energy from
the discard pile—and they
can make their opponents
Paralyzed.
Psychic
Psychic-type Pokémon are
great for special powers!
Their opponents often find
themselves Asleep, Confused,
or Poisoned.
Colorless
Colorless-type Pokémon have
lots of different moves,
and they work with any kind
of deck.
Dragon
Dragon-type Pokémon have
very strong attacks, but often
require two Energy types to
use them.
Fairy
Fairy-type Pokémon
have tricks that will make
opposing Pokémon’s
attacks less effective. Since
Sword & Shield, you’ll find
some Pokémon that used to
be Fairy types showing up
as Psychic types instead.


5
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Parts of a Pokémon Card
CARD NAME
STAGE
CARD NAME
TRAINER TYPE
COLLECTOR CARD NUMBER
EXPANSION CODE
EVOLVES FROM
POKÉMON
CARD TYPE
TRAINER RULE
TEXT BOX
POKÉMON TYPE
HP


6
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
3 Card Types
You’ll find 3 different types of cards in the Pokémon TCG:
Pokémon
Of course the most important cards are Pokémon! Most of these cards are Basic Pokémon, Stage 1 Pokémon, or Stage 2 Pokémon. Stage 1
and Stage 2 Pokémon are also called Evolution cards. Look at the upper-left corner and you will see the Pokémon’s Stage and the Pokémon
it evolves from, if any.
Energy Cards
Most of the time, Pokémon can’t attack without Energy cards! You’ll need to match the symbols of the attack cost to the Energy card, but any type
of Energy can be used for .
Trainer Cards
Trainer cards represent the Items, Supporters, Stadiums, and Pokémon Tools a Trainer can use in battle. You can see the specific Trainer subtype
in the upper-left corner and any special rules for that subtype at the bottom of the card.


PILE
DISCARD
DECK
BENCH
SPOT
ACTIVE
PRIZE
CARDS
7
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Zones of the Pokémon TCG
ACTIVE SPOT
The top row of a player’s in-play section is the
Active Spot. Each player starts with (and must
always have) one Pokémon in their Active Spot—
this is the Active Pokémon. Each player may
have only one Active Pokémon at a time. If your
opponent doesn’t have any more Pokémon in play,
you win the game!
BENCH
The bottom row of a player’s in-play section is for
the Benched Pokémon. Each player may have up
to 5 Pokémon on the Bench at any one time. Any
Pokémon in play other than the Active Pokémon
must be put on the Bench.
HAND
Each player draws 7 cards at the
beginning of the game and keeps
their own hand hidden. Cards you
draw go into your hand. Players
may not look at their opponent’s
hand unless a card says so.
DECK
Each player starts with their own
deck of 60 cards to play the game.
While both players know how many
cards are in each deck, no one can
look at or change the order of the
cards in either player’s deck unless
a card says so.
PRIZE CARDS
Each player has their own Prize cards. Prize cards
are 6 cards that each player sets aside, face down,
from the top of their own deck while setting up to
play. When you Knock Out an opposing Pokémon,
you take one of your Prize cards and put it into
your hand. If you’re the first one to take your last
Prize card, you win!
DISCARD PILE
Each player has their own discard
pile. Cards taken out of play go to
the discard pile, unless a card is
played that says otherwise.
Typically when a Pokémon is
Knocked Out, it and any attached
cards (such as Energy cards) are
sent to its owner’s discard pile.
IN PLAY
The in-play zone is shared by
the players. Each player has two
sections for their Pokémon...


8
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Playing the Game
Pokémon TCG games are fast and furious. Here’s the summary to play right away!
How to Win the Game
You can win the game in 3 ways:
1) Take all of your Prize cards.
2) Knock Out all of your opponent’s Pokémon in play.
3) If your opponent has no cards in their deck at the beginning of their turn.
Setting Up to Play
1) Shake hands with your opponent.
2) Flip a coin. The winner of the coin flip decides which player goes first.
3) Shuffle your 60-card deck and draw the top 7 cards.
4) Check to see if you have any Basic Pokémon in your hand.
5) Put one of your Basic Pokémon face down as your Active Pokémon.
6) Put up to 5 more Basic Pokémon face down on your Bench.
If you don’t have any Basic Pokémon, what do you do? First, reveal your hand to your opponent and shuffle your hand
back into your deck. Then, draw 7 more cards. If you still don’t have any Basic Pokémon, repeat.
Each time your opponent shuffles their hand back into their deck because they had no Basic Pokémon, you may draw
an extra card!
7) Put the top 6 cards of your deck off to the side face down as your Prize cards.
8) Both players flip their Active and Benched Pokémon face up and start
the game!
PILE
DISCARD
DECK
BENCH
SPOT
ACTIVE
PRIZE
CARDS
BENCHED POKÉMON
ACTIVE POKÉMON


9
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Parts of a Turn
Each turn has 3 main parts:
1) Draw a card.
2) Do any of the following actions in any order:
A. Put Basic Pokémon cards from your hand onto your Bench (as many as you want).
B. Evolve your Pokémon (as many as you want).
C. Attach an Energy card from your hand to one of your Pokémon (once per turn).
D. Play Trainer cards (as many as you want, but only one Supporter card and one Stadium card per turn).
E. Retreat your Active Pokémon (only once per turn).
F. Use Abilities (as many as you want).
3) Attack. Then, end your turn.


PILE
DISCARD
DECK
BENCH
SPOT
ACTIVE
PRIZE
CARDS
YOUR HAND
10
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Turn Actions
1) Draw a Card
Start your turn by drawing a card. If there are no cards in your deck at the beginning of your turn and you cannot draw a card, the game is
over, and your opponent wins.
2) Do Any of These in Any Order:
A) Put Basic Pokémon cards from your hand onto your Bench (as many as you want).
Choose a Basic Pokémon card from your hand and put it face up onto your Bench. Your Bench can hold up to 5 Pokémon.
BASIC POKÉMON ON BENCH


11
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
B) Evolve Pokémon (as many as you want).
If you have a card in your hand that says “Evolves from X,” and X is the name of
a Pokémon you had in play at the beginning of your turn, you may play that card
in your hand on top of Pokémon X. This is called “evolving” a Pokémon.
You may evolve a Basic Pokémon to a Stage 1 Pokémon or a Stage 1 Pokémon
to a Stage 2 Pokémon. When a Pokémon evolves, it keeps all attached cards
(Energy cards, Evolution cards, etc.) and any damage counters on it. Any
effects of attacks or Special Conditions affecting the Pokémon—such as Asleep,
Confused, or Poisoned—end when it evolves. A Pokémon cannot use the attacks
or Abilities of its previous Evolution unless a card says so.
C) Attach an Energy card to one of your Pokémon (once per turn).
Take an Energy card from your hand and put it under your Active Pokémon or one of your
Benched Pokémon to indicate that this is Energy it can use. You can attach Energy just once
each turn!
Evolution notes: Neither player can evolve a Pokémon on its first turn in play. When you evolve a Pokémon, it means that
Pokémon is new in play, so you can’t evolve it a second time the same turn! You can evolve any Pokémon you have in play,
whether it’s Active or Benched. Finally, neither player can evolve a Pokémon on that player’s first turn unless a card says so.
Example:
The Houndstone card in Susan’s hand reads, “Evolves from Greavard,” and Susan has a Greavard in play. She may play the
Houndstone card on top of the Greavard card, keeping any damage counters and clearing all other effects.


12
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
D) Play Trainer cards.
When you play any Trainer card, do what it says and obey the rule at the bottom of the
card. Most Trainer cards are put into the discard pile afterward. You can play as many
Item and Pokémon Tool cards as you like. Supporter cards are played like Item cards, but
you can play only one Supporter card each turn.
The player who goes first cannot play a Supporter card on their first turn.
Stadium cards have a few special rules:
• A Stadium stays in play when you play it.
• Only one Stadium can be in play at a time—if a new one comes into play, discard the old
one and end its effects.
• You can’t play a Stadium card if a Stadium with the same name is already in play.
• You can play only one Stadium card each turn.
E) Retreat your Active Pokémon (once per turn)
On most turns, you probably will not retreat, but if your Active Pokémon has lots of
damage counters on it, you might want to retreat it and bring out a Pokémon from your Bench
to fight instead. You may also want to do this if you have a strong Pokémon on the Bench ready
to battle!
To retreat, you must discard 1 Energy from your Active Pokémon for each  listed in its
Retreat Cost. If no  are listed, it retreats for free. Then, you switch that retreating Pokémon
with a Pokémon from your Bench. Keep all damage counters and all attached cards with each
Pokémon when they switch. Pokémon that are Asleep or Paralyzed cannot retreat.
When your Active Pokémon goes to your Bench (whether it retreated or got there some other
way), some things do go away—Special Conditions and any effects from attacks.
If you retreat, you can still attack that turn with your new Active Pokémon.
F) Use Abilities (as many as you want)
Some Pokémon have special Abilities they can use. Many of them can be used before you attack.
Each Ability is different, though, so read carefully to see how each one works. Some work only
if a condition is met, while others work all the time even without you using them. Be sure to
announce which Abilities you are using so your opponent knows what you’re doing.
Remember, Abilities aren’t attacks, so you can still attack if you use an Ability!
You can use Abilities from both your Active and Benched Pokémon.


This attack is called
Rain Splash
Quaxwell needs 1  Energy
attached to use this attack
Quaxwell needs 3
Energy attached to
use Spiral Kick:
1  Energy and
2 Energy of any type
This attack is called
Spiral Kick
Rain Splash does 20
damage to your opponent’s
Active Pokémon
Spiral Kick does 70
damage to your opponent’s
Active Pokémon
13
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
A) CHECK the Energy attached to your Active Pokémon.
You need the right amount of Energy attached to
a Pokémon for it to attack. For example, look at
Quaxwell. Its Rain Splash attack costs , so you
must have at least 1  Energy attached to
Quaxwell to use this attack. Next, its Spiral Kick
attack costs   . You need at least 3 Energy
attached to Quaxwell to use Spiral Kick, and the
means you need to have 1  Energy attached.
However, the  means that any type of Energy
can be used for the other two Energy.  will work,
but so will , , or any other Energy type.
Once you are sure you have the right Energy,
announce which attack you are using.
3) Attack and End Your Turn
When you are ready to attack, first make sure that you’ve done everything in step 2 that you want to do. Once you attack, your turn is over,
so you can’t go back later!
Attacking has three simple steps. Once you get it figured out, you’ll be attacking like a pro in no time!
On the first turn of the game, the starting player skips this step. Once that player has done all their other actions, the turn
will end. After that, each player attacks as normal. Think carefully if you want to go first or second!
What Energy would you
need to use Sandaconda’s
Sandstorm Spray attack?
That’s right, 3  Energy
and 1 Energy of any type!
You may see some attacks
with this cost symbol.
That means the attack has
a cost of 0, and you can
use it without any Energy
attached to the Pokémon!


14
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
B) CHECK Weakness and Resistance of your opponent’s Active Pokémon.
Some Pokémon have Weakness or Resistance to Pokémon of certain types, marked in the
lower-left corner of the card. (For example, Sprigatito has Weakness to   Pokémon.) If the
attack does damage, your opponent’s Active Pokémon takes more damage if it has Weakness
to the attacker’s type. It takes less damage from a Pokémon if it has Resistance to that
Pokémon’s type.
Don’t apply Weakness and Resistance for Benched Pokémon!
C) PUT damage counters on your opponent’s Active Pokémon.
When you attack, put 1 damage counter on your opponent’s Active Pokémon for each 10
damage your Pokémon’s attack does (written to the right of the attack name). In the example
to the right, Fuecoco’s Gnaw attack does 10 damage. Then, Sprigatito’s Weakness of ×2  to
Pokémon makes that 10 ×2 = 20 damage. So put 2 damage counters on Sprigatito. If an attack
says to do something else, be sure to do that, too!
Your attack is complete, so check to see if any Pokémon were Knocked Out by the attack.
Some attacks can damage more than one Pokémon, and sometimes they can even damage
the Attacking Pokémon! So, make sure to check every Pokémon that was affected by the attack.
If a Pokémon has total damage at least equal to its HP (for example, 5 or more damage counters
on a Pokémon with 50 HP), it is Knocked Out. If a player’s Pokémon is Knocked Out, that player
puts it and all cards attached to it in the discard pile. That player’s opponent takes 1 of their own
Prize cards and puts it into their hand.
The player whose Pokémon was Knocked Out chooses a new Active Pokémon from their Bench.
If your opponent can’t do this because their Bench is empty (or for any other reason), you win the
game! If your opponent still has Pokémon in play, but you just took your last Prize card, you also
win the game!
D) Your turn is over.
Next, you take care of a few special things during Pokémon Checkup.


15
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
4) Pokémon Checkup
Pokémon Checkup is a special step that happens between turns. Before the game continues to the next player, you’ll need to take care of Special
Conditions in this order:
1) Poisoned

2) Burned
3) Asleep
4) Paralyzed
You’ll also need to apply the effects of any Abilities or Trainer cards, or anything else that a card states must happen during Pokémon Checkup (or
between turns). You can check Special Conditions and then other effects, or you can check other effects and then Special Conditions, but you can’t
mix them up—for example, you can’t add Poison damage, then apply an Ability, then flip for Asleep, etc.
After both players have gone through these checks, any Pokémon that has no HP remaining is Knocked Out. (The player moves a new Pokémon
into the Active Spot, and the opponent takes a Prize card.) Then, start the next player’s turn!
Special Conditions
Some attacks make the Active Pokémon Asleep, Burned, Confused, Paralyzed, or Poisoned—these are called “Special Conditions.” They can only
happen to an Active Pokémon—when a Pokémon goes to the Bench, it recovers from all Special Conditions. Pokémon also recover when they evolve.
Asleep
Turn the Pokémon counterclockwise to show that it is Asleep.
If a Pokémon is Asleep, it cannot attack or retreat. During Pokémon Checkup, flip a coin. If you flip heads,
the Pokémon recovers (turn the card right-side up), but if you flip tails, it stays Asleep.
Burned
When a Pokémon is Burned, put a Burn marker on it. During Pokémon Checkup, put 2 damage counters on
your Burned Pokémon, then flip a coin. If heads, the Pokémon recovers (remove the Burn marker).
A Pokémon cannot have two Burn markers; if an attack gives it another Burn marker, the new Burned
Condition simply replaces the old one. Make sure your Burn markers look different from your
damage counters.


16
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Poisoned
When a Pokémon is Poisoned, put a Poison marker on it. During Pokémon Checkup, put a damage counter
on your Poisoned Pokémon.
A Pokémon cannot have two Poison markers; if an attack gives it another Poison marker,
the new Poisoned Condition simply replaces the old one. Make sure your Poison markers look different from
your damage counters.
Removing Special Conditions
When a Pokémon evolves or moves to the Bench, it recovers from all Special Conditions. The only Special Conditions that prevent Pokémon from
retreating are Asleep and Paralyzed. Since Asleep, Confused, and Paralyzed all rotate the Pokémon card, whichever one happened last to the
Pokémon is the only one that is still in effect. Since Poisoned and Burned use markers, those don’t affect other Special Conditions. An unfortunate
Pokémon could be Burned, Paralyzed, and Poisoned all at the same time!
Other Effects
If an effect of an Ability or Trainer card says it happens during Pokémon Checkup (or between turns),
apply it as part of this step.
For example, Snorlax’s Lazy Eating Ability says to heal 10 damage from it between turns.
This would occur during Pokémon Checkup.
Paralyzed
Turn a Paralyzed Pokémon clockwise to show that it is Paralyzed.
If a Pokémon is Paralyzed, it cannot attack or retreat. After its owner’s next turn, it recovers during
Pokémon Checkup (turn the card right-side up).
Confused
Turn a Confused Pokémon with the top of the card pointed toward you to show that it is Confused.
If your Pokémon is Confused, you must flip a coin before attacking with it. If heads, the attack works
normally. If tails, the attack doesn’t happen, and you put 3 damage counters on your Confused Pokémon.


17
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Pokémon Leagues and ex Battle Decks
This is all you need to know to play the game! If you need more help, ask your local store for an ex Battle Deck. It comes with everything you need
to play the game, including a quick-start version of the rules!
Learn to play Pokémon games!
Earn cool prizes!
Battle against other players!
Ask your hobby store if they have a Pokémon League,
or find one near you at www.pokemon.com/locator.


18
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Advanced Rules
Full details of taking a mulligan
If either player has no Basic Pokémon in their opening hand, that player must take a mulligan. Here’s how the timing works:
If both players have no Basic Pokémon in their opening hands:
Both players reveal their hands, then just start over as normal.
If only one player has no Basic Pokémon in their opening hand:
1)	 That player announces that they have a mulligan, then waits until the other player has finished setting up to play.
2)	Then, the player with no Basic Pokémon reveals their hand and shuffles it back into their deck. The player keeps doing this until they
get an opening hand with a Basic Pokémon, then proceeds as normal.
3)	Then, the player who did not have to start over may draw a card for each extra mulligan their opponent took.
For example, if both players took 2 mulligans, and then Player A took 3 additional mulligans, Player B may draw up to 3 cards.
If any of those cards are Basic Pokémon, they may be put onto the Bench.
4)	Then, reveal all Active and Benched Pokémon, and begin the game.


19
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
What counts as an attack?
Every attack has a cost and a name, and it might have a base damage and damage text. Most of the text on a Pokémon describes its attack, even if it
doesn’t do any damage.
Dolliv’s Apply Oil attack affects Call for Family,
but not Busybody Nurse.
For example, Squawkabilly’s Call for Family attack does no damage, but it’s still an attack! Anything else is called an Ability or something else.
For instance, Blissey’s Busybody Nurse Ability might let your Active Pokémon recover from all Special Conditions, but it doesn’t count as an attack.


20
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Full details of attacking
For most attacks, the order in which you do things doesn’t really matter. However, for a complicated attack, here are the full steps:
A)	Look at your Pokémon and decide which attack to use. Make sure you have the correct Energy attached.
Then, announce you are using that attack.
B)	Apply any effects that might alter or cancel the attack. For example, if an attack that was used against your Pokémon
last turn says, “If the Defending Pokémon tries to attack during your opponent’s next turn, your opponent flips a coin.
If tails, that attack doesn’t happen.” (But remember—if an Active Pokémon moves to the Bench, all effects of attacks
go away. So if your Active Pokémon has changed since your opponent used the attack in this example, you don’t have
to flip a coin.)
C)	If your Active Pokémon is Confused, check now to see if its attack doesn’t happen.
D)	Make any choices the attack requires you to make. For example, if an attack says, “Choose 1 of your opponent’s
Benched Pokémon,” you would make that choice now.
E)	Do anything the attack requires you to do to use it. For example, you must flip a coin if an attack says “Flip a coin.
If tails, this attack does nothing.”
F)	Apply any effects that happen before damage, then place damage counters, and then do all other effects.
Figuring out how many damage counters to place is usually straightforward. However, if many things are changing the damage,
follow these steps in this order:
1)	 Start with the base damage printed to the right of the attack. If an ×, –, or + is printed next to it, the attack text will tell
you how much damage to do. If an attack tells you to put damage counters on a Pokémon, you have no more
calculations to do because damage counters aren’t affected by Weakness, Resistance, or any other effects on a Pokémon.
Just put those damage counters on the affected Pokémon!
2)	Figure out damage effects on your Active Pokémon based on Trainer cards or any other relevant effects. For example,
if your Pokémon used an attack last turn that said, “During your next turn, this Pokémon’s attacks do 40 more damage
(before applying Weakness and Resistance),” then add that in. Stop if the base damage is 0 (or if the attack does not do any
damage at all). Otherwise, keep going.
3)	Increase the damage by the amount next to your opponent’s Active Pokémon’s Weakness, if it has Weakness to your
Active Pokémon’s type.
4)	Reduce the damage by the amount next to your opponent’s Active Pokémon’s Resistance, if it has Resistance to your
Active Pokémon’s type.
5)	Figure out damage effects of Trainer or Energy cards, or other effects on your opponent’s Active Pokémon. For example,
if your opponent’s Active Pokémon has an Ability that says “This Pokémon takes 20 less damage from attacks
(after applying Weakness and Resistance).”
6)	For each 10 damage of the final attack, put 1 damage counter on the affected Pokémon. If the damage is 0 or less,
don’t put on any damage counters!


21
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
What’s the difference between “up to” and “any amount”?
If a card uses the phrase “up to X”—for example, “move up to 3 damage counters” or “attach up to 2 Energy cards”—you can choose any number
between 1 and X. (The exception is drawing cards: you can choose 0 for an effect that says “draw up to X cards.”) If a card uses the phrase
“any amount” or “any number”—for example, “discard any amount of Energy from this Pokémon”—you can choose 0. And things that say
“you may” are optional, meaning you can choose not to do them.
What if you should draw more cards than you have?
If a card tells you to draw or look at more cards from your deck than you have left, draw or look at the cards you have and continue play
as normal.
For example, if a card tells you to draw or look at the top 5 cards of your deck and you have only 3 cards left in your deck, draw or look at those 3.
You lose if you cannot draw a card at the beginning of your turn, but not if you cannot draw one because a card told you to do so.
What if both players win at the same time?
You win if you take your last Prize card or if your opponent has no Benched Pokémon to replace their Active Pokémon if it is Knocked Out
(or otherwise removed from play). This makes it possible for both players to win at the same time.
If this happens, play Sudden Death. However, if you win in both ways and your opponent wins in only one way, you are the victor!
What’s Sudden Death?
In Sudden Death, you play a new game, but each player uses only 1 Prize card instead of the usual 6. Except for the single Prize card, treat the
Sudden Death game like a whole new game! Flip a coin to see who goes first and set everything up as usual. The winner of this game is the overall
winner. If the Sudden Death game also ends in Sudden Death, just keep playing Sudden Death games until somebody wins.
What does and doesn’t count for a Pokémon’s name?
Some Pokémon cards have extra information after their name, such as a Level or a symbol like
. A Pokémon’s name changes how you can evolve
or play certain cards. Level is not part of a Pokémon’s name:
• Gengar, Gengar LV. 43, Gengar LV. 44, and Gengar LV.X all have the same name
Symbols at the end of a Pokémon’s name are part of a Pokémon’s name:
• Alakazam, Alakazam
, and Alakazam h all have different names from each other
• However, δ (Delta Species) is not part of a Pokémon’s name. Aerodactyl and Aerodactyl δ (Delta Species) have the same name
An owner or form name in a Pokémon’s name is part of the Pokémon’s name:
• Meowth, Alolan Meowth, and Rocket’s Meowth have different names
When you are building a deck, you can have only 4 copies of a card with the same name in it, except for Basic Energy cards. If your deck has 1 each
of Gengar, Gengar LV.43, Gengar LV. 44, and Gengar LV.X, you can’t put any more cards named Gengar in your deck! However, you could have 4
Meowth, 4 Alolan Meowth, and 4 Rocket’s Meowth.
When evolving, the “evolves from” Pokémon name must match the Pokémon being evolved.
So Graveler can evolve from Geodude, or Geodude LV. 12, but not Brock’s Geodude.


22
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Deck Building
When building most decks, you’ll need to follow a few rules. One of the most important rules is that your deck must be exactly 60 cards; it can’t be
any more or less, even 59 or 61 cards!
Also, except for Basic Energy, you can only have 4 cards with the same name in your deck. This means you can have only 4 cards called “Pignite”
in your deck, even if they all have different attacks. Finally, your deck must have at least one Basic Pokémon in it.
Building your own deck can be challenging, but also a lot of fun. A League Leader at a Pokémon League can help you with some ideas. Another good
idea is to find an ex Battle Deck you like and try modifying it. Remember to keep it at exactly 60 cards! If you’re starting a whole new deck, though,
try these guidelines for starters:
• Pick one or two Energy types at most. Remember, most  Pokémon can use any Energy for attacks, so they can go in nearly any deck!
• To make sure you have enough Energy cards, try between 12 and 15 in your 60-card deck.
• Trainer cards are important, too. Cards like Nest Ball and Jacq can help you find exactly the cards you need! Around 20 to 25 Trainer cards
is a good start.
• Of course, you need Pokémon! The rest of your deck will be Pokémon. Remember, you need at least one Basic Pokémon in your deck.
Collect your favorite Pokémon so you can have 4 copies of them in your deck to make sure you draw them as much as possible.
And, if that Pokémon evolves, try to get 4 of each Pokémon in its Evolution chain as well!
Every deck is different and will fit your personality and personal strategy. Over time you’ll find the numbers of Pokémon, Trainer, and Energy cards
you like the best.


23
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 1: Ancient and Future
Starting with the Scarlet & Violet—Paradox Rift expansion, you might encounter Pokémon
or other cards that have a special label that denotes them as “Ancient” or “Future.”
Ancient Pokémon tend to focus on primitive, hard-hitting attacks, while Future Pokémon
are more proficient with technical, precise attacks.
Appendix 2: Pokémon ex
Pokémon ex are powerful Pokémon that show off a Pokémon with more HP and stronger attacks
than regular Pokémon, but there are risks to playing these powered-up Pokémon! When one of
your Pokémon ex is Knocked Out, your opponent takes 2 Prize cards.
The ex is part of a Pokémon ex’s name. Thus Miraidon and Miraidon ex have different names,
so you can have up to 4 of each in your deck if you wish.
Note that Pokémon ex and Pokémon-EX are not the same name, so if you wanted to, you could
have 4 Magnezone ex and 4 Magnezone-EX in your deck.


24
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 4: Lost Zone
The Lost Zone is a unique zone that’s considered out of play. Cards can be sent to the Lost Zone in many ways, such as through the effects
of attacks, Abilities, or Trainer cards. Unlike the discard pile, any cards sent to the Lost Zone cannot be recovered and are no longer playable
during that game.
Appendix 3: Tera Pokémon ex
Tera Pokémon ex have a crystalline appearance and a new effect that prevents all attack
damage done to them while they’re on your Bench. This effect applies to all attacks,
both yours and your opponent’s.
Like other Pokémon ex, when a Tera Pokémon ex is Knocked Out, your opponent takes
2 Prize cards.


25
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 6: Pokémon VSTAR
There’s a new Evolution in the Pokémon TCG: Pokémon VSTAR! These extraordinary Pokémon
come with a game-changing Ability or attack that’s called a VSTAR Power. You can’t use more than
one VSTAR Power during an entire game, regardless of how many Pokémon VSTAR you play.
Make sure you use that VSTAR Power at the right strategic moment, because you only get one shot!
Once you’ve used up your VSTAR Power for the game, be sure to flip over your VSTAR marker to
show that you’ve used it.
Just like normal Pokémon V, if your Pokémon VSTAR is Knocked Out, your opponent takes
2 Prize cards.
Notice that Shaymin VSTAR evolves from Shaymin V. This means you can only evolve Shaymin VSTAR
from Shaymin V, not regular Shaymin! Also, Pokémon VSTAR are a new stage: VSTAR. These cards count
as Evolution cards, and all the normal rules for Evolution apply to Pokémon VSTAR. And although
Pokémon VSTAR are a different stage, they are still considered Pokémon V—so if something affects
Pokémon V, it also affects Pokémon VSTAR.
Appendix 5: Radiant Pokémon
All Radiant Pokémon appear with their special Shiny coloration and have the Radiant Pokémon
Rule, which says you can’t have more than 1 Radiant Pokémon in your deck. A Radiant Pokémon is
considered a Pokémon with a Rule Box. Note that “Radiant” is part of the Pokémon’s name, so your
deck could include 4 Greninja and 1 Radiant Greninja. Radiant Pokémon are always Basic
Pokémon and do not evolve from or into any other card.


26
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 7: Pokémon V-UNION
All four “pieces” of a Pokémon V-UNION have the same name (for example,
“Mewtwo V-UNION”). Therefore, you can only have four total cards named
Mewtwo V-UNION in your deck, not four of each individual piece. All four
copies of a Pokémon V-UNION in your deck must be part of the same set
and illustrated by the same artist.
You must play all four pieces of a Pokémon V-UNION onto your Bench at the same
time from your discard pile. You can’t play just one or two pieces of the Pokémon
V-UNION. A Pokémon V-UNION only takes up one Bench spot and can only have
one Pokémon Tool attached. Each Pokémon V-UNION may only be played once per
game, per Pokémon name. You can play a Mewtwo V-UNION and then a Greninja
V-UNION, but not Mewtwo V-UNION a second time.
Pokémon V-UNION are not Basic Pokémon! Thus, you cannot play them as
your Active or Benched Pokémon during setup. Also, you must include at least
one Basic Pokémon in your deck if you only have Pokémon V-UNION in it so far.
Finally, Pokémon V-UNION are not Evolution cards. Pokémon V-UNION have
their own unique Stage called V-UNION.
Cards or effects that refer to “Basic,” “Stage 1,” “Stage 2,” or “Evolution” cards
don’t affect Pokémon V-UNION. For example, an Ability that says “Your opponent’s
Basic Pokémon cannot attack” will not affect Mewtwo V-UNION. Also, cards that
affect “unevolved Pokémon” will affect Pokémon V-UNION.
When a Pokémon V-UNION is in play, the set of four cards is treated as one card.
When those cards are anywhere else (in your hand, your deck, your discard pile,
or as your Prize cards), each card is treated as one separate card. For example,
if a card tells you to “search your deck for a Pokémon and put it into your hand”
and you have three pieces of Mewtwo V-UNION in your deck, you may only put
one of those three pieces into your hand.
The only characteristics that can be referenced on an individual piece are “types” (Water, Psychic, etc.), “Category” (Pokémon), and “Card Name.”
If you play a card that says, “Search your deck for a
Pokémon,” you could grab any of the four pieces of a Psychic-type Pokémon V-UNION,
since each piece has the
type printed on it. Characteristics such as attacks, Abilities, HP, Retreat Cost, Weakness, or Resistance cannot be
referenced to any individual card piece. This means that if you play a card that says, “Search your deck for a Pokémon with a Retreat Cost of 3
or more,” you will not be able to grab any Pokémon V-UNION pieces, even if the combined card has a Retreat Cost of 3 or more while in play.
Pokémon V-UNION are still considered “Pokémon V” and fall into the category of “Pokémon with a Rule Box” while in play since they have the
V-UNION rule and give up 3 Prize cards when Knocked Out. If a Stadium in play removes Abilities from Pokémon with a Rule Box, then your
Pokémon V-UNION will be affected and no longer have access to any of its Abilities while in play. When not in play, individual Pokémon V-UNION
pieces are not considered “Pokémon with a Rule Box.”


27
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 10: Pokémon VMAX
Pokémon VMAX can take your Pokémon V to the next level! These massively powerful cards come with monstrous
HP and attacks—suitable for these giant Pokémon! Most Pokémon VMAX have 300 or more HP, making them very
difficult to take down in battle.
But with great power comes great risk: if your Pokémon VMAX is Knocked Out, your opponent takes 3 Prize cards.
Appendix 8: Battle Styles
Starting with the Sword & Shield—Battle Styles expansion, you might encounter
Pokémon that have a special label that denotes them as “Single Strike” or “Rapid
Strike” style. Single Strike Pokémon tend to focus on powerful, hard-hitting attacks.
Rapid Strike Pokémon are more proficient with sneaky, technical attacks.
“Fusion Strike” Pokémon, introduced in the Sword & Shield—Fusion Strike
expansion, rely on teamwork and combine the strengths of both Single Strike
and Rapid Strike styles.
Trainer cards and Energy cards can also be tagged as Single Strike, Rapid Strike,
or Fusion Strike, and they tend to assist Pokémon of that particular Battle Style.
Be on the lookout for ways to combine several different cards of the same Battle
Style to unleash some truly masterful strategies!
Notice that Lapras VMAX evolves from Lapras V. This means you can only
evolve Lapras VMAX from Lapras V, not regular Lapras! Also, Pokémon VMAX
are a new stage: VMAX. These cards count as Evolution cards, and all the
normal rules for Evolution apply to Pokémon VMAX. And although Pokémon
VMAX are a different stage, they are still considered Pokémon V—so if
something affects Pokémon V, it also affects Pokémon VMAX.
Appendix 9: Pokémon V
Pokémon V are powerful Basic Pokémon with big HP and strong attacks. These amazing Pokémon have a big
impact on the game, but they come with a risk: when one of your Pokémon V is Knocked Out, your opponent
takes 2 Prize cards.


28
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 11: Regional Variants
You may find some familiar Pokémon with a new look! These are Paldean, Hisuian, Galarian,
or Alolan Pokémon. You may even find a few that evolve into brand-new Pokémon!
Note that “Paldean,” “Hisuian,” “Galarian,” or “Alolan” is part of the Pokémon’s name—this means that Paldean Clodsire ex can only evolve from
Paldean Wooper, not from Wooper, and Alolan Persian can only evolve from Alolan Meowth, not from Meowth or Galarian Meowth. Also, you can
have up to 4 Wooper and up to 4 Paldean Wooper in your deck if you wish.


29
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 13: TAG TEAM
A TAG TEAM is a special kind of Basic Pokémon-GX that features multiple Pokémon joining forces to form a super-powered team! TAG TEAM
Pokémon-GX tend to have a lot of HP and big attacks, including a special GX attack that gains a bonus if a requirement is met, such as attaching
extra Energy or playing a certain Trainer card. But be careful: when your TAG TEAM is Knocked Out, your opponent gets to take 3 Prize cards!
Appendix 12: TAG TEAM
Supporter Cards
Pokémon aren’t the only ones who can form a TAG TEAM! These powerful Supporter cards feature
two Trainers teaming up on one card. And just like the TAG TEAM Pokémon-GX, every TAG TEAM
Supporter card offers a special team bonus: if you discard extra cards when you play it, you get an
additional effect. Each TAG TEAM Supporter card has a unique effect, so be on the lookout for these
powerful pairs!


30
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 14: Prism Star Cards
Prism Star cards (denoted by a  symbol) are powerful cards that come with a restriction:
you can only have one copy of a Prism Star card in your deck. Unlike ACE SPEC cards,
you can include Prism Star cards with different names in your deck, so you could have one
Giratina , one Lunala , one Cyrus , and one Super Boost Energy  in the same deck.
They also have a unique rule—if a Prism Star card would go to the discard pile, you put it in
the Lost Zone instead. Check out the glossary for more information on the Lost Zone!
Appendix 15: Rare Fossil and
Unidentified Fossil
The strange Item cards Rare Fossil and Unidentified Fossil can be played as Basic Pokémon.
They can evolve into any Fossil Pokémon that says “Evolves from Rare Fossil” or “Evolves from
Unidentified Fossil,” such as Dracozolt or Shieldon.


31
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Notice that Primarina-GX evolves from Brionne. This means you can evolve Brionne into
Primarina OR Primarina-GX—the choice is up to you! Also, Pokémon-GX have the same
Evolution stages as most other Pokémon and follow the same rules. This means you can
use a Basic Pokémon-GX as your starting Active Pokémon if you like!
This greater power comes with a greater risk: when one of your Pokémon-GX is Knocked
Out, your opponent takes 2 Prize cards.
Appendix 16: Pokémon-GX
Pokémon-GX are powerful Pokémon with more HP and stronger attacks. Each one also
has a super-powerful GX attack. You can’t use more than one GX attack during an entire
game, regardless of how many Pokémon-GX you play. Make sure you use that GX attack
at the right strategic moment, because you only get one shot! The damage counter sheet
includes a special GX marker to keep track of this—turn it face down once you’ve used up
your GX attack for the game.
Special rules for Pokémon-GX
The GX is part of a Pokémon-GX’s name. Thus, Incineroar and Incineroar-GX have
different names, and you can have up to 4 of each in your deck if you wish.


32
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 17: Ultra Beasts
Ultra Beasts have invaded the Pokémon TCG! These mysterious creatures can appear as Pokémon-GX,
which stand out with crimson colors instead of the typical blue GX colors. Some cards have effects that
interact specifically with Ultra Beasts, which are labeled with a bar in the upper-right corner of the
card. All Ultra Beasts have an attack that has something to do with Prize cards, so be on the lookout
for interesting ways to use them.
Appendix 18: Dual-Type Pokémon
Dual-type Pokémon are just like regular Pokémon, but they have two types at the same time.
For example, Azumarill is both a
Pokémon and a
Pokémon, so any card that affects one of those
types will affect Azumarill.
If a dual-type Pokémon attacks a Pokémon that has a Weakness or Resistance to either of its types,
the attack’s damage will be affected. And if the Pokémon has a Weakness to one of the types and
Resistance to the other, remember to apply Weakness and then Resistance!


33
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 19: BREAK Evolution
BREAK Evolution is a special kind of Evolution. A Pokémon BREAK keeps all the attacks and Abilities of its previous Evolution (plus its Weakness,
Resistance, and Retreat Cost), but it gains extra attacks or Abilities, its HP changes, and it could even change type!
Special rules for Pokémon BREAK
Just like GX, BREAK is part of a Pokémon BREAK’s name.
Thus, Raichu and Raichu BREAK have different names, and you
can have up to 4 of each in your deck if you wish.
Pokémon BREAK are a new stage: BREAK. These cards count as
Evolution cards, and all the normal rules for Evolution apply to
Pokémon BREAK.


34
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 20: Ancient Traits
Ancient Traits appear on certain Pokémon cards, right under the Pokémon’s name.
These Ancient Traits give the Pokémon special powers, so be sure you read each one
carefully! Note that Ancient Traits are not attacks or Abilities, so cards that prevent
those from being used won’t affect Ancient Traits.
Appendix 21: Team Flare Hyper Gear
The name “Team Flare Hyper Gear” appears on special cards that you can use to mess with your
opponent’s plans. These are Pokémon Tool cards you attach to your opponent’s Pokémon-EX.
They have a negative impact on those Pokémon, making it harder for them to defeat you!
Note that if the card is removed from the Pokémon for any reason, it goes to the discard pile
of the player who originally played it.


35
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 22: Pokémon-EX
Pokémon-EX are powerful Pokémon that show off a Pokémon with more HP and stronger attacks than regular Pokémon, but there are risks to
playing these powered-up Pokémon!
Special rules for Pokémon-EX
The EX is part of a Pokémon-EX’s name. Thus Yveltal and Yveltal-EX
have different names, so you can have up to 4 of each in your deck if
you wish.
When one of your Pokémon-EX is Knocked Out, your opponent takes
2 Prize cards.
Apart from this, Pokémon-EX play just like any other Pokémon card.
Also, Pokémon-EX can have a regular and a full-art rare Ultra version!


36
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 23: Mega Evolution Pokémon
Mega Evolution Pokémon represent a previously undiscovered peak of Evolution. These cards turn a Pokémon-EX into an even more powerful
Pokémon! Knowing the right time to play these Pokémon will be key to your new strategies.
Special rules for Mega Evolution Pokémon
Just like EX, the M (which stands for Mega) is part of a Mega Evolution
Pokémon’s name. Thus, Mega Venusaur-EX and Venusaur-EX have
different names, and you can have up to 4 of each in your deck if
you wish.
There are 2 special rules for Mega Evolution Pokémon. Since they are
still Pokémon-EX, when one of them is Knocked Out, your opponent
takes 2 Prize cards. Also, when 1 of your Pokémon becomes a Mega
Evolution Pokémon, your turn ends. Make sure you’ve done everything
else you want to do on your turn before you play one of these powerful
Pokémon!
Note that Primal Reversion Pokémon work just like Mega Evolution
Pokémon, so the same rules apply!
Notice that Mega Venusaur-EX evolves from Venusaur-EX.
This means you can only evolve Mega Venusaur-EX from
Venusaur-EX, not Venusaur! Also, Mega Evolution Pokémon are
a new stage: MEGA. These cards count as Evolution cards, and all
the normal rules for Evolution apply to Mega Evolution Pokémon.


37
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 25: ACE SPEC Trainer Cards
ACE SPEC Trainer cards are so powerful that you
can only have one in your deck. And that’s not one
of each: that’s only one ACE SPEC card total in your
deck. Be sure to assess all the ACE SPEC cards to
decide which one will work best in your deck!
Appendix 24: Team Plasma Cards
Team Plasma cards—Pokémon, Trainer cards, and
Energy—have a striking, unique look. You’ll first
notice the Plasma blue border, then you’ll see
the Team Plasma title. Finally, the villains’ iconic
shield appears in the text box.
Any card with this look is considered a Team
Plasma card.
For Pokémon, Team Plasma is not part of the
Pokémon’s name. So if you have 4 Team Plasma
Liepard in your deck, you can’t have any more
Liepard cards in your deck. Also, Team Plasma
Pokémon evolve as normal. Team Plasma Liepard
will evolve from Purrloin just like other Liepard.


38
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Appendix 26: Restored Pokémon
Some Fossil Pokémon have their own special Stage: Restored Pokémon. As you can see, Omanyte is a Restored Pokémon, and has the rule
“Put this card on your Bench only with the effect of Helix Fossil Omanyte.” This means exactly what it says: the only way to play Omanyte to your
Bench is to play the Helix Fossil Omanyte Item card. If you look at Helix Fossil Omanyte, you’ll see exactly how you can get Omanyte into play.
Once you do, Omastar works just like any other Stage 1 Pokémon—put it on top of Omanyte when you could normally play a Stage 1 Pokémon.
Key Restored Pokémon Notes
• If you have a Restored Pokémon in your hand, you cannot play it to your Bench unless you play an Item card and its effect tells you to.
• Restored Pokémon are not Basic Pokémon! Thus, you cannot play them as your Active or Benched Pokémon during setup. Also, you must
still have at least one Basic Pokémon in your deck if you otherwise only have Restored Pokémon in your deck. Finally, Restored Pokémon
are not Evolution cards.
• Cards or effects that refer to “Basic,” “Stage 1,” “Stage 2,” or “Evolution” cards don’t affect Restored Pokémon. For example, a card that says
“Search your deck for a Basic Pokémon” can’t find this Restored Omanyte card. However, one that says “Search your deck for a Pokémon”
can find Omanyte. Also, cards that affect unevolved Pokémon will affect Restored Pokémon.
• When playing with older Fossil Pokémon, the most important rules to follow are the“Evolves from” or “Put this card into play…” text.
For example, Kabuto was printed in XY—Fates Collide as a Restored Pokémon, along with a Stage 1 Kabutops that evolves from it.
Regardless of which Kabuto you have in play, you can evolve it into any Kabutops that says “Evolves from Kabuto.” This means you
can evolve a Stage 2 Kabutops from a Restored Kabuto or a Stage 1 Kabutops from a Stage 1 Kabuto.


39
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Glossary
Ability: An Ability is an effect on a Pokémon that is not an attack.
Some will be active all of the time, while some you will need to choose
to use. Read each Ability to make sure you understand exactly how
and when it works.
ACE SPEC Trainer card: A powerful Trainer card.  You may only
have one ACE SPEC Trainer card in your deck.
Active Pokémon: Your in-play Pokémon that is not on the Bench.
Only the Active Pokémon can attack.
Ancient Trait: Ancient Traits are special powers (like Ω Barrier
or α Recovery) that appear on certain Pokémon cards, right under
the Pokémon’s name. They are not attacks or Abilities, so cards that
prevent those from being used won’t affect Ancient Traits.
attach: When you take a card from your hand and put it on one of
your Pokémon in play.
attack: 1) When your Active Pokémon fights your opponent’s
Pokémon. 2) The text written on each Pokémon card that shows what
it does when it attacks (a Pokémon can have several attacks on it).
Attacking Pokémon: The Active Pokémon, as it performs
an attack.
Basic Energy card: A Grass
, Fire
, Water
,
Lightning
, Psychic
, Fighting
, Darkness
, Metal
,
or Fairy
Energy card.
Basic Pokémon card: A card you can play directly from your
hand on your turn. See Evolution card.
Bench: The place for your Pokémon that are in play but are not
actively fighting. They come out and fight if the Active Pokémon
retreats or is Knocked Out. When Benched Pokémon take damage,
do not apply Weakness or Resistance.
between-turns step: The part of each turn when the game shifts
from one player to the other, now known as Pokémon Checkup. Check
Poisoned, Burned, Asleep, and Paralyzed at this step, and see whether
any Pokémon are Knocked Out.
BREAK Evolution: A special kind of Evolution. When a Pokémon
evolves into a Pokémon BREAK, it keeps the attacks, Abilities,
Weakness, Resistance, and Retreat Cost of its previous Evolution.
Burn marker: What you put on a Pokémon to remind you it is
Burned. Remove the marker if the Pokémon is Benched or evolved.
damage: What usually happens when one Pokémon attacks another.
If a Pokémon has total damage greater than or equal to its Hit Points,
it is Knocked Out.
damage counter: A counter put on your Pokémon to show it
has taken 10 damage. It stays on your Pokémon even if the Pokémon
is Benched or evolved. Although 50- and 100-damage counters
are sometimes used for convenience, if a card refers to a “damage
counter,” it means the standard 10-damage counter.
Defending Pokémon: The Pokémon that receives an attack.
devolve: Certain cards can devolve an evolved Pokémon, which is
the opposite of evolving your Pokémon. When a Pokémon is devolved,
it also loses Special Conditions and any other effects.
discard pile: The cards you have discarded. These cards are always
face up. Anyone can look at these cards at any time.
dual-type Pokémon: A Pokémon that has two types at the same
time.
Energy card: Cards that power your Pokémon so they can attack.
See Basic Energy card.
Evolution card: A card you play on top of a Basic Pokémon card
(or on top of another Evolution card) to make it stronger.
evolved Pokémon: A Pokémon in play that has another Pokémon
under it.
Fossil Trainer cards: A special kind of Trainer card that acts like
a Basic Pokémon when put into play. When a Fossil Trainer card is in
your hand, deck, or discard pile, it is not considered a Basic Pokémon.
GX attack: A powerful kind of attack. Only Pokémon-GX have
GX attacks. A player can’t use more than one GX attack in a game.
GX marker: A reminder tool sometimes included with the damage
counter sheet. When you use your GX attack for the game, turn your
GX marker face down.
Hit Points (HP): A number every Pokémon has, telling you how
much damage it can take before it is Knocked Out.
in play: Your cards are in play when they are on the table. Basic
Pokémon cards, Evolution cards, and Energy cards cannot be used
unless they are in play. (Your deck, your discard pile, and your Prize
cards are not in play, but your Benched Pokémon are.)
Item card: A type of Trainer card. Follow the instructions on the
card and then discard it.
Knocked Out: A Pokémon is Knocked Out if it has damage greater
than or equal to its Hit Points. That Pokémon goes to the discard
pile along with all cards attached to it. When one of your opponent’s
Pokémon is Knocked Out, take one of your Prize cards.


40
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Lost Zone: Cards sent to the Lost Zone are no longer playable
during that game. Put them face up anywhere out of play.
Mega Evolution Pokémon: A very powerful kind of Pokémon-EX
with an additional drawback: when one of your Pokémon becomes a
Mega Evolution Pokémon, your turn ends.
Owner: A Pokémon with a Trainer’s name in its title, such as Brock’s
Sandshrew or Team Rocket’s Meowth. Cards with ,
,
,
, or

do NOT count as “Owner” cards.
Poison marker: Object put on a Pokémon to remind you it is
Poisoned. Remove the marker if the Pokémon is Benched or evolved.
Poké-Body: An effect that is active as soon as that Pokémon is in
play and lasts until the Pokémon leaves play.
Poké-Power: A once-per-turn power on Active and Benched
Pokémon you must choose to use. Most Poké-Powers are turned off
if the Pokémon has a Special Condition.
Pokémon: The colorful characters that fight for you in the Pokémon
Trading Card Game. They are represented in the game by Basic
Pokémon and Evolution cards.
Pokémon Checkup: The part of each turn when the game shifts
from one player to the other, formerly known as the between-turns
step. Check Poisoned, Burned, Asleep, and Paralyzed at this step, and
see whether any Pokémon are Knocked Out.
Pokémon ex: A Pokémon ex is a powerful Pokémon, but your
opponent takes 2 Prize cards when it is Knocked Out. Pokémon ex and
Pokémon-EX are not the same.
Pokémon-EX: Pokémon-EX are a stronger form of Pokémon
with a special drawback: when your Pokémon-EX is Knocked Out,
your opponent takes two Prize cards instead of one. Pokémon-EX and
Pokémon ex are not the same.
Pokémon-GX: Pokémon-GX are a stronger form of Pokémon with
a special drawback: when your Pokémon-GX is Knocked Out, your
opponent takes two Prize cards instead of one. Each Pokémon-GX has
a powerful GX attack.
Pokémon LEGEND: Special double cards that showcase powerful
Legendary Pokémon. Both cards must be played together at the same
time.
Pokémon LV.X: Stronger versions of a regular Pokémon, put on top
of the regular Pokémon of the same name and adding extra abilities
to the original Pokémon.
Pokémon Power: A special Ability some Pokémon have. Pokémon
Powers are divided into two categories: Poké-Power and Poké-Body.
They always include the words “Poké-Power” or “Poké-Body” so you
can tell they are not attacks.
Pokémon SP: A special Pokémon trained by a particular Trainer,
with a symbol in its name to show its owner. A Zapdos  card has
a different name from a Zapdos card, because Zapdos  is a Team
Galactic’s Pokémon and the  is part of the name.
Pokémon Tool: A type of Trainer card that is similar to an
Item card but is attached to your Pokémon when you play it.
Each Pokémon can have only 1 Pokémon Tool attached at a time.
Pokémon V: Pokémon V are powerful Basic Pokémon with big HP
and strong attacks. These amazing Pokémon have a big impact on
the game, but they come with a risk: when one of your Pokémon V is
Knocked Out, your opponent takes 2 Prize cards.
Pokémon VMAX: Pokémon VMAX can take your Pokémon V to
the next level! These massively powerful cards come with monstrous
HP and attacks—suitable for these giant Pokémon! Most Pokémon
VMAX have 300 or more HP, making them very difficult to take down
in battle. But with great power comes great risk: if your Pokémon
VMAX is Knocked Out, your opponent takes 3 Prize cards.
Pokémon VSTAR: Pokémon VSTAR evolve from Pokémon V and
give up 2 Prize cards when Knocked Out. Each Pokémon VSTAR has a
special VSTAR Power.
Pokémon V-UNION: An enormous Pokémon made up of four
separate cards. To play a Pokémon V-UNION, you must put all four
cards from your discard pile onto your Bench at the same time.
Prism Star  card: A powerful kind of card with a couple of
special rules.  cards can be Pokémon, Trainer cards, or Special
Energy. You can’t have more than one  card with the same name
in your deck. If a  card would go to the discard pile, put it in the
Lost Zone instead.
Prize cards: The 6 cards you put face down while setting up
to play. Every time one of your opponent’s Pokémon is Knocked Out,
you take 1 of your Prize cards and put it into your hand (or 2 Prize
cards, for certain kinds of Pokémon such as Pokémon ex). When you
take your last Prize card, you win!
Radiant Pokémon: A unique Pokémon that appears with its
special Shiny coloration and is always a Basic Pokémon. You can’t
have more than 1 Radiant Pokémon in your deck.
Resistance: A Pokémon with Resistance takes less damage when
attacked by Pokémon of a certain type. The amount of Resistance is
printed next to the type(s) of Resistance a Pokémon has, if any.


41
Pokémon Trading Card Game Rules
Credits
Project Management: Jen Wood, Noriko Tseng, Shoichi Takasaki,
Jeff Hansen, Breon McMullin, Ron Foster, Arden Williams,
Miyano Sato, Jonathan Novotarski, James Richards, Brendan Gaylord,
and Sachiko Hogge
Translation: Satoko Deas, Bryson Clark, David Dunlap,
and Chris Walters
Game Data Management: Dylan “ExoByte” Mayo and Rachel Henson
Rulebook Writing: TPCi Editing Staff and Kyle Sucevich
Editing Coordination: Anja Weinbach
Editing: Hollie Beg, Eoin Sanders, Holly Bowen, Stephen “Phen” Crane,
and Laura Temple
Graphic Design (Creative): Doug Wohlfeil, Adam Law, Anupa Patel,
Huy Cao, Kevin Fish, Kumi Okada, Gwen Machan, Julie Jennings,
Kodi Sershon, Taylor Hardman, and Chris Franc
Graphic Design (Card Localization): Ginny Baldwin, Christopher Brittain,
Sang Hoon Shin, Lauren Batzer, and Michael Heck
Graphic Design (Logo): Gwen Machan
Booster Pack Illustrations: N-DESIGN Inc.
Special Thanks To: GAME FREAK inc., Creatures Inc., Milky Isobe,
The Pokémon Company, and The Pokémon Company International
Original Japanese Game
Executive Producer: Tsunekazu Ishihara
Producer: Yuji Kitano
Original Game Design: Tsunekazu Ishihara, Kouichi Ooyama,
and Takumi Akabane
Game Development: Creatures Inc.
Game Director: Atsushi Nagashima
Art Direction: Satoru Nagaya
English-Language Version
The Pokémon Company International
Producer: Kenji Okubo
Product and Game Development: Barry Sams, Yasuhiro Usui,
Jim Lin, Kyle Sucevich, Mia Violet, Amelia Bottemiller,
Tyler Ninomura, Paul Peterson, Kathy Sly, Edward Zhang,
Kenny Wisdom, and Barb Ng
Production Coordination: Russ Foster, Jay Moon, Doug Storms,
David Hoskinson, Ross Garrett, Corey Lewis, John Moore,
Paige Robison, and Krista Endahl

Need Help Playing a Game?
For gameplay help, strategies, rulings, or tournament information,
visit our website at:
www.pokemon.com
For other general customer service issues:
www.pokemon.com/support
Phone: 1-425-336-5036
©2023 Pokémon. ©1995–2023 Nintendo / Creatures Inc. / GAME FREAK inc.
TM, ®
, and character names are trademarks of Nintendo.
Restored Pokémon card: A card you play with the associated
fossil Item card.
retreat: When you switch your Active Pokémon with one of your
Benched Pokémon. To retreat, you must discard Energy from the
retreating Pokémon equal to the Retreat Cost of the Pokémon. This
cost appears in the lower right-hand corner of the card. You can only
retreat once per turn.
Special Conditions: Asleep, Burned, Confused, Paralyzed, and
Poisoned are called Special Conditions.
Stadium card: A type of Trainer card that is similar to an Item card
but stays in play after you play it. Only one Stadium card can be in
play at a time—if a new one comes into play, discard the old one and
end its effects. You can play only one Stadium card each turn.
Sudden Death: Sometimes both players win at the same time. In
this case, you play a short game called “Sudden Death” (use only 1
Prize card each instead of 6).
Supporter card: A Trainer card similar to an Item card. You can
play only one Supporter card each turn.
TAG TEAM: A TAG TEAM is a special kind of Basic Pokémon-GX
with even more power and an even bigger drawback: when your
TAG TEAM is Knocked Out, your opponent takes three Prize cards.
Each TAG TEAM has a powerful GX attack that gains a bonus if the
requirement is met.
TAG TEAM Supporter card: A special kind of Supporter card
that pairs up two Trainers on one card. In addition to its primary
effect, each TAG TEAM Supporter card offers a bonus effect if you
discard extra cards when you play it.
Technical Machine: A kind of Trainer card (an Item or Pokémon
Tool) you can attach to your Pokémon. When attached, your Pokémon
can use the Technical Machine attack as its own. Technical Machine
cards remain attached unless the card text says otherwise.
Tera Pokémon ex: Tera Pokémon ex are like other Pokémon ex,
with an additional effect that protects them from attack damage while
they’re on your Bench. Your opponent takes 2 Prize cards when 1 of
your Tera Pokémon ex is Knocked Out.
Trainer card: Special cards you play to gain advantages in the
game. See Item card, Pokémon Tool card, Stadium card, Supporter
card.
Trainers’ Pokémon: Pokémon with Trainers’ names in their titles,
like Brock’s Sandshrew. You cannot evolve a regular Sandshrew into
Brock’s Sandslash, and you cannot evolve a Brock’s Sandshrew into a
regular Sandslash. This is because “Brock’s” is part of the name.
VSTAR marker: A reminder tool sometimes included in booster
packs and other products. When you use your VSTAR Power for the
game, turn your VSTAR marker face down.
VSTAR Power: A powerful kind of attack or Ability. Only Pokémon
VSTAR have a VSTAR Power. A player can’t use more than one VSTAR
Power in a game.
Weakness: A Pokémon with Weakness takes more damage when
attacked by Pokémon of a certain type. The effect of the Weakness is
indicated next to the type(s) of Weakness a Pokémon has, if any.
